HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan. Judy
Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Winter wallops the East Coast.
High winds, and heavy snow
have cities from North Carolina
to New York shutting down.
Then: a clash over how to handle
a rise in feral cats in
communities across America.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY, "Reveal":
Take Antioch, California, about
40 miles east of San Francisco.
The town is home to about 17,000
strays, one cat for every six
citizens.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it's
Friday. David Brooks and Ruth
Marcus are in to analyze the
week's
news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: A blizzard is
bearing down tonight on
Washington, D.C., and states to
the north and south. The snow
moved in this afternoon,
shutting down schools,
government
and transportation, and
canceling thousands of flights,
forecasters warning that, by
this
time tomorrow, they will be
measuring in feet, instead of
inches.
With store shelves nearly empty,
and road crews gearing up,
millions across the Eastern
U.S. waited for the worst.
Forecasters are predicting one
of the biggest storms ever
in the Mid-Atlantic especially,
with up to three inches of snow
an hour. As the wall
of weather closed in, blizzard
warnings or watches went up from
Arkansas and Tennessee,
through Washington and as
far north as New York.
About six inches of snow fell
overnight in the Little Rock,
Arkansas, area, breaking
a record set more than 20 years
ago. It shut down schools and
state government offices.
And, in North Carolina, the snow
started falling before sunrise,
triggering a number of fatal
wrecks.
GOV. PAT MCCRORY (R), North
Carolina: Where I'm seeing the
accidents is where it looks
like it's a safe road, and
people are speeding, and because
they assume it's safe, because
they don't see snow on the
roads. And that's our greatest
concern right now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: North Carolina
declared a state of emergency,
along with Tennessee,
Virginia, Maryland, and
Pennsylvania. So did the
nation's capital, sitting
squarely in
the blizzard's bullseye, with
estimates that more than two
feet of snow will fall.
MURIEL BOWSER (D), Mayor of
Washington, D.C.: I want to be
very clear with everybody. We
see this as a major storm. It
has life and death implications,
and all the residents
of the district of Columbia
should treat it that way. We
have a forecast that I don't
think we have had in 90 years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In a bid to
beat the storm, the federal
government closed all its
Washington
offices at noon. And for the
first time, the city's entire
subway system planned to close
for the weekend.
Meanwhile, all the major
airlines issued waivers for the
weekend, allowing passengers to
rebook
and avoid the storms. The snow
and high winds are expected to
continue into Sunday, amid
warnings of more than a billion
dollars in damage. So far, at
least five people have
died in storm-related accidents.
In the day's other news, bad
weather off the Greek islands
caused one of the worst migrant
tragedies yet. At least 46
people, including 17 children,
drowned when two wooden boats
capsized as they tried to cross
from Turkey. So far, dangerous
winter weather conditions
have not stopped the surge of
people trying to reach Europe by
boat. But the rising fatalities
make this the deadliest
January on record.
The prime minister of Iraq now
says criminal gangs may have
abducted three Americans in
Baghdad for ransom. But he also
says it is not yet clear they
were kidnapped at all.
The three disappeared in
Baghdad last Saturday.
Iraqi Prime Minister Haider
al-Abadi spoke in Davos,
Switzerland, today, where he's
attending
the World Economic Forum.
HAIDER AL-ABADI, Iraqi Prime
Minister: I have to rely on the
information I have. A, we don't
know if they have been
kidnapped. They're missing.
We're still looking for them.
There
were not demands so far. I don't
believe there is any political
thing out of this, because
what political gain would
anybody get from that?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Other Iraqi
officials and some Western
security sources have said two
Shiite militias are the top
suspects in the abductions.
North Korea announced today it
has detained an American college
student. He is identified
as 21-year-old Otto Frederick
Warmbier from the University of
Virginia. He had been in
the country on a five-day tour.
North Korean state TV made the
announcement. It said Warmbier
is accused of committing
unspecified -- quote -- "hostile
acts" and allegedly plotting to
destroy the country's unity.
The U.S. State Department said
it is looking into the report.
In Somalia, at least 20 people
died overnight when Islamist
gunmen attacked a popular
beachside
restaurant. It happened in
Mogadishu, and the Islamist
group Al-Shabaab claimed
responsibility.
The attackers set off bombs and
then opened fire on diners,
triggering an hours-long gun
battle with security forces. It
wasn't clear how many gunmen
were among the dead.
Tunisia's government imposed a
nationwide curfew today in a bid
to halt violent demonstrations
over youth unemployment.
Tensions flared this week after
a young job seeker was
electrocuted
when he climbed a transmission
tower in protest. Unemployment
in the North African nation has
worsened since the 2011
revolution that launched the
Arab Spring.
And back in this country, Wall
Street rallied as oil pushed
back above $32 dollars a barrel.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 210 points to close above
16090. The Nasdaq rose
nearly 120 points, and the S&P
500 added 38. Overall, the
market scored its first weekly
gains of the year.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Brooks and Marcus, as the race
for the White House intensifies;
looking to the skies for a
possible new planet; a big push
so no child is left offline; how
to control a spike in feral cats
across America; and much more.
Turning to the race for the
White House, it's crunch time
for the candidates on the
campaign
trail, with only 10 days
remaining until caucus-goers
gather to make their choices in
Iowa.
The front-runners are using
tried-and-true tactics to turn
votes in their favor.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: Voting day gets
closer, and, what do you know,
the race suddenly gets sharper.
In each party, the two
front-runners, previously
friendly, are going on the
attack.
For Republicans, the Ted
Cruz-Donald Trump detente has
exploded into shots fired.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: Cruz is going down.
He is going down. No,
he's having a hard time. He
looks like a nervous wreck.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate: Donald
has been an active supporter. He
gave
$100,000 to the
Clinton Foundation.
LISA DESJARDINS: And in the last
day, the candidates have each
launched new ads, each
arguing the other is not
a real conservative.
Trump's play, immigration. His
ad raises Cruz's past support of
some legal status for the
undocumented.
SEN. TED CRUZ: I want
immigration reform to pass, and
that allows those who are here
illegally
to come in out of the shadows.
LISA DESJARDINS: Cruz's ad plays
a different card, pointing to
Trump's defense of eminent
domain. That's the taking of
private land for development or
roads.
NARRATOR: It made him rich, like
when Trump colluded with
Atlantic City insiders to
bulldoze
the home of an elderly widow.
LISA DESJARDINS: Their fight for
the nomination is now suddenly a
fight for the soul of the
Republican Party. This week, Bob
Dole, former Senate Republican
leader and presidential
nominee, blasted Cruz, saying he
would mean cataclysmic and
wholesale losses for the party.
Cruz has said that's a sign that
Washington is scared of him.
Other conservatives see
Trump as more alarming.
"National Review" magazine, a
conservative icon, etched its
cover with the words "Against
Trump," inside, sharper words
still. Editors wrote that "Trump
is a political opportunist, that
he knows approximately as much
about national security
as he does about the nuclear
triad, which is to say almost
nothing."
They also wrote that "Trump has
shown no interest in
conservative issues, limiting
government,
reforming entitlements
or the Constitution."
Trump, for his part, was equally
stinging, tweeting back that
"'The National Review'"
is a failing publication
that has lost its way.
Meantime, with the Democratic
race suddenly tighter, Hillary
Clinton is pushing her national
security credentials in a new
ad, and she's going after Bernie
Sanders' for wanting
government-run
health care after Obamacare.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: I don't
want to rip up this
accomplishment
and begin this contentious
debate all over again. That's
where I disagree with my
esteemed
opponent, Senator Sanders.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sanders is
getting attention for this more
thematic, ad. It portrays a
movement of regular working
Americans. The images have been
criticized for a lack of
diversity, in a race where
Sanders trails with
African-Americans.
On the trail, the Vermont
senator is stepping up his
criticism, this morning pointing
to
Social Security. He'd like to
raise taxes on the wealthy to
expand it. It is closing
argument time, 10 days until
Iowa, tight races on both sides.
That also means time for closing
punches.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And now to the
analysis of Brooks and Marcus.
Judy spoke with them
earlier today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that is New
York Times columnist David
Brooks and Washington Post
columnist Ruth Marcus.
Mark Shields is away.
And welcome to you both.
So, as we just heard, a new
front has opened up in this
battle inside the Republican
Party.
David, you have this iconic
magazine of the conservative
movement, "The National Review,"
going after Donald Trump, saying
he's a menace to conservatism.
He's coming back. Where is
this headed?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, the
split is interesting.
It's sort of between people who
are more ideologically- or
philosophically-minded and those
who are
more rogue- and chaos-minded.
And so the rogue side is Sarah
Palin going with Trump. The
people who are more
ideologically conservative,
whether it's "National Review"
or the Wall
Street Journal editorial page,
are suspicious of Trump because
he's ideologically all over
the place.
And so it's sort of breaking
down on that line, a little
elite, populists, so the talk
show folks are a little more --
a lot more pro-Trump than the
print folks. And so that's
the breakdown.
I happen to think that, in
voters' minds, that the last
four years have made Republicans
less conservative. The economic
stress and the economic crisis
have made them think,
I want somebody on my side. And
they are a little more willing
to tolerate government
than they were, say, 10 years
ago. And so I think -- and
they're willing to tolerate
a little more chaos than
they were 10 years ago.
So, I think, if it's ideology
vs. chaos, I think chaos
probably wins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which is good
news for Donald Trump, if that
is the way it works.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
do you see this?
RUTH MARCUS: Well, I think
breakdown might be the operative
word.
And there is also this division
really between various pieces of
the Republican establishment.
The conservative Republican
establishment, as exemplified by
"National Review," is freaking
out, I think, is the technical
term, about the Trump menace,
and that's the word that
"National Review" used, menace.
The Washington establishment and
the party establishment is
freaking out about Cruz,
because they see, strangely,
Trump as -- some of them do --
we heard from Bob Dole this
week -- Trump as more electable
than Cruz. They do not want to
have no shot at a third
term in the White -- they don't
want to have a third Democratic
term in the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, so,
but where does it go?
David, you're saying that
Republicans are less tolerant or
less warm to the idea of
conservatism. They're willing to
tolerate some chaos. But does
that mean -- does that
automatically mean that Trump
prevails over these other
establishment candidates?
DAVID BROOKS: Not automatically.
I'm still hoping the
establishment will get off their
rear ends and actually do
something
and act like an establishment
and rally behind one candidate.
But you have to say right now,
given all the things that have
happened this weekend -- and,
remember, a lot can still
happen between now and the
caucuses. The final week is like
70 percent of the campaign.
You could see massive swings.
And so you're looking for magic.
Who has magic right now?
And given all the things that
have happened, I don't think Bob
Dole gives Trump a lot of
magic, but Sarah Palin gives
him a little. And to me...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You do think so?
DAVID BROOKS: ... the vibe feels
a little like, if there is any
magic there, Trump has
a little of that magic, and
Cruz, even in the polls, is
falling slightly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
the Sarah Palin endorsement?
RUTH MARCUS: So, as a general
matter, endorsements don't
matter very much.
But this one, from that low
baseline, matters a little more
than most. First of all, once
again, Donald Trump managed to
take attention away from
everybody else, including Ted
Cruz,
who needs the attention more,
put it on him, Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For several days.
RUTH MARCUS: For several
days, and also Sarah Palin.
Also, to the extent that
endorsements matter, they matter
because they're validators of
something that voters may still
have a question about. With
Donald Trump -- and this is the
argument Ted Cruz has been
making -- the question is, is he
a real conservative, can you
really
trust him to be a conservative,
not the guy with New York
values?
With Sarah Palin, who may not be
convincing to Republicans inside
the Beltway, she can
speak pretty convincingly to
voters in Iowa who, remember,
were for Rick Santorum four
years ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But she also --
David, there are some voters who
say they absolutely don't
trust her and don't
care what she thinks.
DAVID BROOKS: And this is why we
shouldn't hand Trump the
nomination. There is a ceiling
there. There is a real ceiling
there, especially as we get into
the more diverse states.
And so I think, once you get an
establishment candidate, a
moderate candidate, what we now
call moderate, Trump is still
very -- extremely vulnerable as
we get there. If you look at
-- if you try to break down the
party into lanes, which may not
be valid anymore, but
there's still 40, 50 percent who
are either moderate, have some
mixture of conservative
and liberal positions, who are
just party regulars, not
particularly ideological.
And those people, that's why
Romney has won. That's why
McCain has won. That's why Dole
has won nominations. That's why
W. ran with compassionate
conservatism. They're still
there. They haven't disappeared.
The party is radicalized,
clearly, but Trump and Cruz
are both still vulnerable if
there's a single alternative.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
RUTH MARCUS: David said "once
you get," and I think that's the
operative term, because
how in this time with super PACs
and so many candidates still
running in that -- for that
moderate establishment, maybe
not moderate, but certainly
establishment mantle, how does
that sort itself out?
That's going to be difficult to
do. There is some -- a degree of
-- that can't be denied
of anti-Trump animus even with
the Republican Party. I have
heard it. I was with a bunch
of voters at a Ted Cruz event in
New Hampshire earlier this week,
and I was surprised at
the number of them who were not
shopping between Cruz and Trump.
Trump was totally off their
list.
DAVID BROOKS: One of the other
thing is the ads they're running
against each other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I was
going to ask you about it.
DAVID BROOKS: And so I think the
Trump ads, they -- I mean,
personally, I find them
extremely
noxious. They're extremely
anti-immigrant. And they attack
Cruz on two grounds, first,
that he's insufficiently
anti-immigrant, and, second,
that he's kind of squirrelly and
there
are some images of him talking
to FOX News looking a little
squirrelly, and that he's
opportunistic.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Squirrelly, meaning?
DAVID BROOKS: That he
flip-flops, which he sort of did
on the immigration issue. He
took
about a week when the
immigration reform was passing
to try to find the right
position
for himself.
And so that's the inauthenticity
and opportunism, where he's
weak. Cruz is hitting back with
an ad charging Trump with being
a ruthless businessman. I don't
think that is an effective
attack line. Donald Trump,
people sort of like that. And
so, if you just look at the
two, the way they're ramping up
their campaigns right now,
again, Trump has a little
advantage
in the ad wars, I would say.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we haven't
talked much about ads in this
campaign, Ruth.
So, in the last hours before
people vote, are these going to
make any difference?
RUTH MARCUS: Well, there have
not been really kind of breakout
ads that have galvanized
attention in this campaign
more than in previous ones.
But there was an interesting one
that was just released last
night from the Bernie Sanders
campaign, with which had this
very morning in America, if you
don't mind my using that
phrase...
JUDY WOODRUFF: From
Ronald Reagan.
RUTH MARCUS: ... with regard to
Bernie Sanders, tone to it. It
had zero message. From the
guy who has a very crisp and
explicit message, it's just
Simon and Garfunkel America song
with pictures of Bernie
Sanders and rapturous voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Could something
like that work? Because we're
seeing a much tougher race,
not as tough as what the
Republicans are engaging in, but
we're seeing a much tougher race
now
between Clinton and Sanders.
RUTH MARCUS: I watched it a few
times. I have to say, it made me
smile. And it made me also
kind of have flashbacks
to Barack Obama 2008.
And I think Hillary Clinton may
be having some flashbacks now as
well, because, as with
Barack Obama, Sanders has turned
his campaign into quite a
movement. You see it with the
voters in New Hampshire. And you
see it with the polls in New
Hampshire.
And it's not that he has -- he
can afford to run that ad,
because it's not as if he
lacks a message. Voters know
clearly what his message is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he also went
after her, David, in that debate
on Sunday night on several
things, including the speaking
fees she collected from Wall
Street, from the big financial
firms.
Is that something that
gains traction for him?
DAVID BROOKS: Among his voters
who think Wall Street is the
epicenter of evil, I think it
is.
They also had an interesting
debate about health care reform.
And that was her making
an incremental argument, we have
got to make our changes
gradually, and him making a
radical
argument. And so it was
interesting. That was a
substantive, real argument about
how
you change any system.
And, again, I'm going to go back
to the magic -- or maybe a
better word is charisma. Some
campaigns have charisma at
certain moments, and some
campaigns are flat in certain
moments.
Right now, in part, like that
ad, Sanders has a little more
charisma to her -- his campaign,
Clinton a little lacking in
charisma. And that's sort of
important, because people just
gravitate in final days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even though he's
talking -- essentially, the
argument is whether you just
wipe away
to what we have done and you go
to a single-payer health care
system, which most Americans say
they don't want, right, or...
RUTH MARCUS: Well, it really is
this argument about
practicality.
And one of the things that's
interesting is there is actually
a parallel argument going
on in the Republican and
Democratic campaigns. So,
Hillary Clinton says, I'm the
pragmatist,
I'm a progressive, but I'm a
pragmatic one. I know how to get
results. What he's saying,
maybe it's a great idea in
theory, but he will never be
able to put it in practice.
Oddly enough, Donald Trump is
making that same argument
against Ted Cruz. He is saying,
Ted Cruz, it can't -- well,
first of all, he's a little
squirrelly and maybe he's not
really a conservative, and look
at this squirrelly answer on
immigration, but, also, Ted Cruz
can't get anything done in
Washington because he doesn't
know how to get along with
anybody,
and he's too extreme.
And so there is that sort of
practicality argument that is
emerging on both sides.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is
interesting, because you see
Bill Clinton out there, David,
making
some of these same arguments.
And, Ruth, you saw him
on the trail this week.
RUTH MARCUS: I was with him. I
was having a little flashback
down memory lane. Bill
Clinton talked about stopping
off at the Dunkin' Donuts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does he have the
same -- does he bring the same
weight, gravitas to this
campaign that he did in
the past, do you think?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. He's still
good. He's still a master at
arguing, master at making the
case.
And there's a lot of residual
good will toward him. What's
striking to me is how, even he
ran as a -- and really governed
as a moderate, he still has
personal good will.
The other thing that's going on
is -- and I think this is also
helping Sanders in New
Hampshire -- and, again, I
wouldn't bet on him to win the
nomination -- but helping him,
Sanders, a little residual
resentment among Democratic
primary voters about Obama, and
his being more centrist than
they would like, especially in
the first, say, six years.
And so they're a little more
suspicious of moderation and are
more willing to take a
flyer on a guy who may
not be that pragmatic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you see that?
RUTH MARCUS: I actually felt a
lot of Obama love still there in
New Hampshire among the
voters that I talked to.
But I think Bill Clinton,
especially among Democratic
primary voters and especially in
New Hampshire, which was a state
that has showered both Clintons
with love and success
-- well, you know, he didn't win
the New Hampshire primary, but
he came in second -- is a
valuable
tool.
I think the really important
question for us all to be
thinking about going forward
is, what if? What if what once
seemed unimaginable happens,
Bernie Sanders wins both Iowa
and
New Hampshire?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right. Right.
RUTH MARCUS: The Clinton
campaign argument is the
demographic fire wall of
minority voters
in South Carolina and beyond.
The Sanders campaign argument is
the kind of magic that
David's been talking about and
whether people will be --
whether that demographic
firewall
is as strong as the Clinton
campaign thinks it is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Less than 30
seconds. I was going to ask you
about foreign policy, the
Iran story, prisoner swap. We
won't have time for that, but it
is striking that, just a
month ago, we were talking about
ISIS, the terrorist threat, and
that seems to be off
the page.
DAVID BROOKS: It will be back.
You never escape it. And I think
the Middle East is more
destabilized
now than in our lifetimes. It
will be back when some incident
happens.
RUTH MARCUS: It will be back.
And it's still very much a
front-and-center part of the
discourse
in the Republican
primary election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Voters
are bringing it up.
RUTH MARCUS: Voters are bringing
it up and candidates are
bringing it up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ruth Marcus,
David Brooks, thank you both.
And good luck in the storm
this weekend.
RUTH MARCUS: Thank you.
DAVID BROOKS: Thank you.
RUTH MARCUS: Same to you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next: a big
finding and discovery in space
that has astronomers and
plenty of other people excited.
Jeffrey Brown has
our conversation.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nine planets in
the solar system, right? That's
what most of us grew up
thinking.
Well, that ended in 2006, when
Pluto was downgraded to a dwarf
planet.
But now comes news that there
might be a ninth planet after
all. Researchers at the
California
Institute of Technology found
evidence of a planet with a mass
10 times that of Earth.
One of the Caltech astronomers,
Mike Brown, joins us now. And I
will add that he is also
known as the chief culprit in
lowering Pluto's status. His
memoir is titled "How I Killed
Pluto and Why It Had It Coming."
So, sort of making amends
here I guess, Mike Brown?
MIKE BROWN, California Institute
of Technology: You know, it's --
I don't think of it that
way. I think of it as, this is
something I have been working at
for 20 years, and Pluto
was just collateral
damage along the way.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, so
let's be as clear as we can
about what you have done here.
You
have not seen this new planet,
right? This is something you
surmise. Explain to us.
MIKE BROWN: Yes, that's
absolutely right, and it's
important to know that we -- no
one
has actually seen
this planet yet.
What we have done is felt it,
or, more precisely, we have seen
its gravitational effect on the
most distant things in the solar
system. And from those
gravitational effects, we can
tell
that it must be out there. And
this is the same way that
Neptune, for example, was
discovered,
by its gravitational effects on
Uranus. So, there's a long
history of this sort of
astronomy.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're seeing
gravitational effects on several
-- I gather, six small
bodies out there?
MIKE BROWN: There is actually
quite a big collection.
There are six that are doing one
thing. There are five more that
are doing something else.
And then there's another eight
doing something. When you put
them all together, it's a pretty
big population that are going in
directions and moving in ways
that they shouldn't be
doing unless there is something
organizing the whole pattern.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this is -- I
don't know if this is a silly
question, but this is what
confused me. If you can see --
or can see those bodies, why can
you not see the planet,
if you know those bodies
are there for sure?
MIKE BROWN: Yes, so that's
a really good question.
The planet -- the effect of the
planet can be felt by probably
many thousands of bodies
that are out there. We have only
found the first score of them.
But there must be many
thousands out there. So it's a
lot easier to look in a random
direction in space and
see something that has been
affected by this planet than to
immediately go and find it.
So, right now, we know the
orbital path of the planet
through the sky, but we don't
know
where in the orbital path it is,
so we're setting out on a grand
search to try to find
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so what --
if it is a planet, what do --
what else you know about
it in terms of size, mass, why
it's so far away from the other
known planets?
MIKE BROWN: It's actually --
having not seen it, we actually
know quite a good bit about
it, or we have inferred
quite a good bit about it.
So we know that it's about 10
times the mass of the Earth. It
has to be that big to have
had the gravitational influence
over such a long distance that
it has. And at 10 times
the mass of the Earth, that
makes it a little bit smaller
than Neptune.
So, we think it's probably a
miniature Neptune. It's probably
a gas giant like Neptune. It
has no solid surface, just a gas
surface. And it has this crazy
elliptical orbit. It
takes 10,000 to 20,000 years to
go around the sun. And the
closest it ever gets to the
sun is about 20 billion miles,
which, to put it in context, is
-- it's something like five
times further than the
distance that Pluto is right.
But on that 10,000-year journey
around the sun, it goes out to
100 billion miles, which
is about 25 times the distance
of Pluto. So, it's really quite
a long ways out there and
on quite an extended orbit.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is not, of
course, the first time that
astronomers have suspected
the presence of a phantom planet
at the outer edges of the solar
system, right? There is
reason to be more
confident this time?
MIKE BROWN: Yes, so, actually,
the idea that there is another
planet out beyond Neptune
or beyond Pluto, when Pluto was
a planet, has a long and, I
would say, fairly sordid
history over the past
hundred years, really.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
MIKE BROWN: Every time
astronomers would see something
that they didn't quite
understand
in the outer part of the solar
system, the immediate thing that
everybody jumps to is
must be a planet.
So, you can go back really over
the last century and read all
these different accounts of why
there must be a planet. Every
single one of them has turned
out to be wrong. Usually,
it's that the data they were
looking at were incorrect.
Sometimes, they were
misinterpreting
data. But they have
always been wrong.
So, we're saying, yes, for 100
years, everybody's been wrong,
but we're, of course, right.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Of course. I
will go with you for now.
But, also, this made me think
about, and for the layman, how
this kind of science is done.
Right? This is always a mix of
theory and observing, that they
both work hand in hand?
MIKE BROWN: Yes, this has
actually been -- that mix is
personified in the two of us
have been
working on this problem.
So, it's me. I'm primarily an
observational astronomer. I look
at the sky and try to figure
out what's going on. My
colleague, who I think did the
heavy lifting here, is
Konstantin
Batygin. He is a theorist. He
understands the gravitational
dynamics in gory detail.
And he and I are four doors down
from each other at Caltech. And
we would be running
back and forth across the
hallways for the past two years,
really. I would bring in some
more observational constraints.
He would think about it, put it
in the computer, write the
equations. We would talk to
each other. We would argue.
It's -- these two different
viewpoints, I think, were
critical to really making this
realization that there has
to be this planet out there.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so what
happens next? How will
scientists verify its existence?
Do you ultimately
have to see it?
MIKE BROWN: You have to see it.
Right now, any good scientist is
going to be skeptical, because
it's a pretty big claim.
And without the final evidence
that it's real, there is always
that chance that it's not.
So, everybody should be
skeptical. But I think it's time
to mount this search.
I mean, we like to think of it
as, we have provided the
treasure map of where this ninth
planet is, and we have done the
starting gun, and now it's a
race to actually point your
telescope at the right spot in
the sky and make that discovery
of planet nine.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Mike
Brown of Caltech, thanks so
much, and good luck.
MIKE BROWN: Thank you.
It's been a pleasure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tonight: an
innovative solution to bridging
the digital divide for students.
Too frequently, kids and their
parents in rural low-income
communities don't have access
to the Internet and high-quality
learning technologies. But, in
California, a unique
project is providing free home
access to the Web in one of the
nation's poorest districts.
Much of the footage for this
story was shot by teenagers who
are part of our Student
Reporting
Labs network, in collaboration
with PBS SoCal in Southern
California.
The correspondent
is David Nazar.
DAVID NAZAR: Thirty minutes west
of the wealthy suburbs of Palm
Springs is a desert oasis
best known its annual Coachella
Valley Music and Arts Festival.
But behind the parties and
concerts stretches a vast and
isolated landscape, home to the
second poorest school district
in the country, where most
families live below the poverty
line and struggle
just to pay the rent.
DARRYL ADAMS, Superintendent,
Coachella Valley Unified School
District: We have some of the
poorest of the poor in our
country, very economically
challenged, and 100 percent of
our students
are on free and reduced lunch.
Some of them living at trailer
home parks that some have
been condemned recently, or some
in railroad, abandoned railroad
cars. It's just unbelievable,
some of the
challenges they face.
DAVID NAZAR: Coachella Valley
Unified School District
Superintendent Darryl Adams
believes
the right use of technology is
critical for the families in
this area, like Norma Olivas
and her daughter, Anisa Perez.
NORMA OLIVAS, Mother: I do see
students sometimes struggling,
and, right now, sometimes, some
of the kids struggling to get
school, to do certain things.
And I wouldn't want my daughter
to go through any that. I
wouldn't want her to be a
dropout.
DAVID NAZAR: When Adams took the
job in 2011, the graduation rate
was 70 percent, according
to the district. One of his key
initiatives was to get every
student an iPad and Wi-Fi
service, but he knew
it would be challenge.
DARRYL ADAMS: We have 1,250
square miles to cover, larger
than the state of Rhode Island.
So, when we out there were spots
in every which way, students
weren't connected, we
said, well, how can we
get them connected?
And so one of the ways, we said,
look, we got 100 buses. Let's
put Wi-Fi routers on
those buses. And let's park
them where the need is.
DAVID NAZAR: Finding the funding
for this fleet of buses was no
easy tasks. Nevertheless,
in 2012, the community voted for
and passed Measure X, a nearly
$45 million school bond
to fund the Mobile Learning
Initiative over 10 years. They
called the program Wi-Fi on
Wheels.
ANISA PEREZ, Student: In the
bus, it's kind of cool that we
have Internet, because when
the project is due the next day,
we can actually spend time to do
it.
DAVID NAZAR: Completing
assignments was difficult for
Anisa before getting her iPad
and Wi-Fi
service at home.
NORMA OLIVAS: We would have to
travel actually to go in, go to
the library, get the books
she needed to look up the
information and go home. I don't
make a lot of money, but
I will do whatever it takes to
make sure she does get a better
education.
DAVID NAZAR: Adams is doing
whatever he can to make sure
that the 20,000 students in his
schools, 98 percent Hispanic and
about 10 percent undocumented,
develop the skills they
need to graduate.
DARRYL ADAMS: So we realized
that we had to provide this to
our students in order for
them to compete in
the 21st century.
DAVID NAZAR: Installing solar
panels on rooftops of the school
buses to power the
state-of-the-art
Wi-Fi routers was a
solution proposed by Adams.
DARRYL ADAMS: Being a musician
by trade -- I was a music
teacher from L.A. Unified when
I started out 30 years ago --
and, as a musician, you're
always creating and thinking of
different
ways to do things or to play
things or to hear things.
And so I brought that to my
career in education. And I have
had some difficulty in the past,
because some people weren't
really kind of ready for Adams'
crazy ideas. But this district
was. And just about anything we
do that's maybe different and is
good for kids, we go
with it.
DAVID NAZAR: CVUSD's director of
technical services, Israel
Oliveros, provides the technical
support for the entire district.
ISRAEL OLIVEROS, Director of
Technical Services, Coachella
Valley Unified School District:
We run power through a conduit
that is already existing on the
bus. It goes through the front
of the bus. That's where the
router is located. Then we do
have the antennas pointed in
different
directions. For the students,
that will cover a 150-foot
radius.
DAVID NAZAR: The school
districts allows a few of these
buses to be parked throughout
the East Valley overnight. For
students, it's a lifeline to the
outside world.
DARRYL ADAMS: We wanted to
ensure that students have 24/7
access to the Internet, because
learning doesn't stop at
the end of the school day.
DAVID NAZAR: Megan Smith is the
chief technology officer of the
United States. It's her job
to advise the president on
technology and innovation that
will improve the future.
MEGAN SMITH, U.S. Office of
Science and Technology Policy:
Coachella is an incredibly
creative
idea. Being able to flip the
classroom and be involved in --
have video at home, instead
of the classroom has a lecture.
So, a lot of work to do in the
rural areas.
DAVID NAZAR: There are federal
programs in place to help
provide Wi-Fi to rural school
districts, like the FCC's E-rate
program, which provides about
$1.5 billion each year
to schools. However, census data
shows that there are still five
million households with
school-age children who are not
effectively connected to the
Internet.
Smith says that has to change.
MEGAN SMITH: There is a lot of
creativity that American people
have.
And so whether it's going to
come from a school district, a
municipal leader, or one of our
national players, we need
everybody in on this game
working on it. It's a very, very
important, fundamental resource
for all of our people. And it
drives our economy. And
it drives our community
and our interconnections.
DAVID NAZAR: With Adams at the
wheel, the graduation rate
jumped from 70 percent to
80 percent. Now the
superintendent has aspirations
beyond students getting their
homework done.
He wants to connect everyone
in the East Valley.
DARRYL ADAMS: Because we found
that we had a problem with some
of the third-party Internet
service provider companies not
willing to go into some of the
areas where we serve.
So, in the long run, we would
like to become our own Time
Warner or our own Cox
Communication
and provide this for our
students. It's too crucial for
them to have this access for us
not to go down this path.
DAVID NAZAR: Anisa recognizes
that technology and the Wi-Fi on
Wheels program is playing
a vital role in her education.
ANISA PEREZ: I want to do this
for my mom, because my mom
didn't really get to finish
school. So that's what motivates
me to actually do -- to finish
school and complete my work
and get the job I want.
NORMA OLIVAS: I would want her
to have a better life than what
I have right now. I would want
her to do really, really good in
school, so she can get all these
ideas that she wants,
nice restaurants, different
things like that. That's one
thing she always wants to do,
travel.
And that's what she's
hoping to go for.
DAVID NAZAR: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm David Nazar in
Coachella Valley, California.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Two of our
Student Reporting Labs, Etiwanda
High School and West Ranch
High School, traveled to the
Coachella Valley to shoot the
video for this story.
For a behind-the-scenes look at
their journey and how the
program is training the next
generation
of public media producers, visit
the Web site at
studentreportinglabs.com.
And now a story about cats, not
the ones living in homes, but
stray and feral cats that live
outside.
By some estimates, there are 80
million feral cats in this
country. And the question of
how to control them is sparking
controversy. Animal rights
activists, who want to save
stray cats, say there is an
alternative to euthanizing feral
cats, a method they say
will control the cat population
that's more humane and
effective. But will it work.
Adithya Sambamurthy from our
partner "Reveal" at the Center
for Investigative Reporting
has the story.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY, "Reveal":
Americans have long been
obsessed with cats in
commercials,
cartoons and, of course,
on the Internet.
But for every cat in our homes,
there's a stray one on the
loose, roaming parking lots,
alleyways, fields and backyards.
They're everywhere, and,
increasingly, it's a problem.
Take Antioch, California, about
40 miles east of San Francisco.
The town is home to about
17,000 strays, one cat
for every six citizens.
At the local animal shelter,
Monika Helgemo is overwhelmed.
MONIKA HELGEMO, Animal Shelter:
This one's here obviously is
saying, pet me, pet me.
This cat here, see the ears
go back? That's a feral cat.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Feral cats
like this one are basically wild
animals, and so they're
not candidates for adoption.
MONIKA HELGEMO: We will do what
we can and see if we can find a
place for her and go
live her life. If not, we're
going to end up having to put
her to sleep, euthanize her.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Antioch is
typical. There are an estimated
80 million stray and feral
cats in the U.S. Traditionally,
the only way to deal with this
overpopulation was to euthanize
them. More than a million cats
are killed in animal shelters
every year. And that's
made some cat lovers so mad,
they have gotten organized.
ACTIVIST: Are you guys ready
to save some more cats?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: This is a
national gathering of feral cat
advocates near Washington, D.C.
It's hosted by Alley Cat Allies.
They run a network of a
quarter-million activists that
fight for feral cats.
BECKY ROBINSON, Founder and
President, Alley Cat Allies: We
changed the community. We
brought
neighbors together. We
changed cat care forever.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Becky
Robinson is the founder and
president of Alley Cat Allies.
She helped pioneer a population
control method called trap,
neuter, return, or TNR.
Instead of killing them, it's
about sterilizing cats and
letting them live the rest of
their
lives outdoors.
BECKY ROBINSON: Trap, neuter,
return for feral cats works. And
what we mean when we say it
works is that it stops the
breeding of a cat, so there's no
more litters of kittens.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: In Antioch,
Susan Smith shows me how trap,
neuter, return is done.
She's supported by Alley Cat
Allies, and she's trying to get
the city to embrace TNR.
SUSAN SMITH, Activist: I'm going
to bait the trap with some wet
food, and then some tuna,
some albacore.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: The cats
are spayed or neutered at a
local clinic, given rabies
shots,
and the tips of their ears are
removed to show that they have
been fixed.
Then Smith returns them back to
the streets where they were
trapped. She continues to
feed them in what are known as
cat colonies. The feeding is
key. Without it, she couldn't
attract other cats in the area
to trap them and get them fixed.
TNR is catching on. More than
400 cities and counties have
adopted this method over the
past 25 years. Even pet products
retailers have signed on,
creating nonprofits that have
donated millions of
dollars to TNR groups.
Bryan Kortis spent the last five
years managing TNR grants for
PetSmart Charities.
BRYAN KORTIS, PetSmart
Charities: PetSmart Charities,
in wanting to end cat
overpopulation,
has embraced trap, neuter,
return as the most effective way
to make that happen.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: TNR's
expansion alarms wildlife
conservation groups.
GRANT SIZEMORE, American Bird
Conservancy: This is an emerging
conservation crisis.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Grant
Sizemore directs the invasive
species programs at the American
Bird Conservancy in
Washington, D.C.
GRANT SIZEMORE: There were zero
domestic cats in North America
in 1492, which means that
we now have well over 100
million invasive predators
roaming the landscape, killing
wildlife.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Sizemore
cites a study from the
Smithsonian Conservation Biology
Institute that estimates cats
kill around 2.4 billion birds
and 12.3 billion mammals
every year.
On Jekyll Island in Southern
Georgia, Dr. Sonia Hernandez and
her research team are
seeing this from the cats'
perspective. They're putting
cameras on cats.
DR. SONIA HERNANDEZ, University
of Georgia: So far, we have been
able to collar 31 cats.
We know that a majority of them
do hunt, despite the fact that
they get fed.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: The cat
camera footage shows that even
well-fed cats in TNR programs
hunt anything they can get their
paws on. They're just hard-wired
to hunt. And the food
used to attract the cats and
trap them also draws in other
predators that can cause
problems.
Raccoons, skunks, and possums
compete with the cats for food.
DR. SONIA HERNANDEZ: We want to
be very careful that we don't
encourage a lot of wildlife
coming together, sharing
pathogens, and then potentially
bringing that to people.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Back in
Antioch, California, public
health concerns prompted the
city to
propose a ban on feeding
cats on public property.
WOMAN: The cats are not
the villains in this.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: There
was stiff opposition.
GIRL: They don't deserve to
starve. They deserve to have a
right to live.
MAN: I'm not afraid of a cat
urinating on my foot. I'm afraid
of the meth heads that
go around my building
and threaten me.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DR. JULIE LEVY, Operation
Catnip: How are things going
over here?
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Dr. Julie
Levy is a professor of
veterinary medicine and is
considered the
preeminent feral cat researcher
in the country. She runs one of
America's largest trap, neuter,
return programs. It's called
Operation Catnip, and it
receives support from PetSmart
Charities.
DR. JULIE LEVY: I'm very
confident we're going to see
this nationally as a successful
model
for cat population control.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: In many
ways, Operation Catnip is the
best-case scenario for trap,
neuter, return. It's
well-funded, with a steady
stream of volunteers.
But when a population biologist
analyzed Operation Catnip's
numbers, the results came up
short.
DR. PATRICK FOLEY, California
State University: Cat
populations were not
significantly going
down. And that's probably the
single take-home lesson here.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Dr. Patrick
Foley teaches at California
State University in Sacramento.
He says there's no proof TNR
reduces large populations of
cats. They just reproduce too
quickly.
DR. PATRICK FOLEY: Imagine
introducing a single pregnant
female cat to an island. She
could
produce three female kittens,
plus herself, by the end of the
year. That means the population
will multiply by
four in one year.
And, next year, if the same
thing happens, then there will
be 16, the year after that
64. If you had money in the bank
at that kind of rate, you would
be delighted. You would,
in fact, be owning the world
after a very few years. And so
would cats.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: According
to Foley's calculations,
Operation Catnip would need
to spay about 75 percent of the
female cats in the county in
order to make this work.
That's roughly 10 times more
than they're able to do right
now.
I asked Bryan Kortis why
PetSmart Charities is involved
with a nationwide campaign, when
the research doesn't show that
it works on large cat
populations.
BRYAN KORTIS: I'm totally
comfortable with trap, neuter,
return moving forward on a much
larger scale than it has in the
past, even though we don't have
100 percent scientific
proof that's been peer-reviewed
and published that it works on
that large of a scale.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: While
Kortis remains committed to the
trap, neuter and return of
feral cats, his employer is
reconsidering. Since we recorded
this interview with Kortis,
PetSmart Charities announced
late last year that it was
laying off its entire staff.
In a statement sent to us, a
spokesperson said: "The
organization is reassessing its
programs, including its support
of trap, neuter, return, but
they will honor all existing
grant
commitments."
Although one of the biggest
funders of trap, neuter and
return is having second
thoughts,
the feral cat movement continues
to gain political clout. Last
month, after a long standoff,
Antioch's cat feeders prevailed.
The city council granted Susan
Smith and her allies
the right to feed as part of an
official trap, neuter and return
program.
When it comes to controlling
cats, it's not only about
science. It's about our
emotions.
And in the court of public
opinion, it seems that America
will always back the cat.
For "PBS NewsHour," I'm Adithya
Sambamurthy in Antioch,
California.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, earlier
this week, I was in New York and
spoke with Adithya Sambamurthy.
As your piece points out, there
is still some question about the
effectiveness of this approach.
So, why are companies and
charities putting money behind
it?
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Well, it's
a good question. And it's one
that I put to PetSmart
Charities.
And the response that I got is
that the founders of the company
want to end homelessness -- cat
homelessness. They want to end
the euthanasia of cats in
shelters. And they believe that
this is the best approach.
When you look at it through
strictly a, you know, animal
rights, animal welfare
perspective,
I think there is something to be
said for it. The problem is
that, at the city level,
at county level, when you're
talking about many thousands of
cats, the research just
doesn't show that it's
working at that level.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK, so let's
talk about the societal impact.
How significant of a
problem is this in
different communities?
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: The study
that I reference is the
University of Georgia's cat
camera
study. And what's really
interesting here is that, even
if you feed cats on a daily
basis and you spay and neuter
them, they are still going to go
out and hunt. They're
instinctual
predators.
The University of Georgia shows
that cats are not just killing
mice and rats. They're
killing frogs, a surprising
number of them, reptiles,
amphibians, small mammals, and
birds.
And so if you have vulnerable
species in your community, it's
a problem.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is there any
way to domesticate a feral cat
if you catch them young enough?
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY: Yes, I did
that. We -- I have adopted a
kitten that was born to a feral
mother. And he's doing really
well and he loves humans.
So he's definitely tame now.
But, for adult feral cats, it's
very rare. And it's not a
policy prescription. We're not
going to adopt our way out of
this problem.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You talk a
little bit about the law of
large numbers here. How do you
ever get control of a population
that's multiplying as quickly as
these cats are?
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY:
It's really difficult.
And the one thing that I found
is that this is a largely
volunteer-driven effort. The
movement to, you know, sterilize
these cats and put them back
outside is largely driven
by volunteers, who are
incredibly hardworking. They
have jobs. They have families.
And they
do this work.
Unfortunately, as I'm finding,
it's not proving to work at that
scale. It's just a really
difficult endeavor.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Adithya
Sambamurthy joining us from San
Francisco from "Reveal" and the
Center for Investigative
Reporting, thanks so much.
ADITHYA SAMBAMURTHY:
Thank you, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For more on
this story, visit "Reveal," the
investigative public radio
show, at RevealNews.org.
Finally tonight, a
"NewsHour" essay.
What better way to battle
discrimination than with pop
culture? Or so thought Haroon
Moghul,
when he asked J.J. Abrams in an
open letter to add an Islamic
character to "Star Wars."
Here's more of his thoughts on
why a Jedi named Mohammad could
help fight fear with
hope.
HAROON MOGHUL, Author: The day
before "The Force Awakens" was
released, I wrote an open
letter to its director, J.J.
Abrams, who also rebooted "Star
Trek."
With tensions between Muslims
and our neighbors worse than I
had ever known, I asked Abrams
to add a positive Muslim
character to one of these
franchises, maybe, I mused, a
Jedi
named Mohammed.
But many readers were
dismissive. One wrote simply
that Star Wars was set a long
time
ago in a galaxy far, far away,
where Islam doesn't exist.
By missing my point, he made my
point. We can accept a Ben
Kenobi, though Ben's a Hebrew
name. We don't seem to have any
trouble with Luke Skywalker,
even though Luke was also
one of the 12 apostles. Captain
Jim Kirk, great, but a Captain
Hussein Kirk, that made
some readers think I wanted
Sharia law on the bridge, when I
had said no such thing.
I only wanted us to confront how
we treat Muslims. Islamophobia
is real, and it's ugly.
Robert Doggart allegedly planned
to attack Muslims in New York
with guns, bombs, even
a machete.
A former Klan member, Glendon
Crawford, tried to build a
radioactive weapon to attack
mosques.
People have been kicked,
punched, stabbed, shot,
murdered, even pushed in front
of trains,
targeted for their faith
and their faith alone.
Islamophobia is like racism, not
because Islam is a race, but
because, for anti-Muslim bigots,
Islam functions in the exact
same way that race does for
racists.
That doesn't mean I deny the
terrible violence committed by
some Muslims, sometimes in
Islam's
name. That doesn't mean I don't
respect everyone's right to
contest ideas and beliefs they
don't
agree with, including my own. It
just means I think judging every
single Muslim by the
actions of a few, especially
when nearly every Muslim
institution and organization
condemns
those actions, is a problem.
What someone thinks of Islam
depends a lot on whether she
knows any Muslims. The challenge
is that, out of 322 million
Americans, only a few million
are Muslim. Even in a
transporter,
how could we meet and greet
everyone in time to change
minds?
That is why I wrote that letter
to J.J. Abrams in The Washington
Post. Science fiction and
fantasy, whether books or
movies, are an astonishingly
effective ways to reach huge
numbers of people,
to reflect us back to ourselves,
and to provoke us to think
differently.
The original "Star Trek"
featured an African
communications officer, a
Russian navigator
and a Japanese helmsman, not to
mention a half-Vulcan,
half-human first officer. That
was back in the 1960s, during
the civil rights era, at the
height of the Cold War, just a
few decades from Japanese
internment camps. Yet the
television show was wildly
popular,
and it still is, as are the many
spinoffs that grew out of it.
It didn't matter where all those
characters came from, but where
they were going, where
no one had gone before. It gave
us a vision for our divided
planet, of a united future
we could want, not dread.
Can we see someone of a Muslim
background being part of that
future too? I hope so.
People often ask me, how can
ordinary folks fight extremism
and intolerance? I tell them,
by imagining a world that's not
just different, but better. You
don't fight fear with fear.
You fight fear with hope.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online: The suicide
of a college student in India
prompted one Indian woman living
in New York City to finally
speak out against the archaic
system of discrimination
that still persists today.
Yashica Dutt was born into the
lowest caste, or Dalit, and now
she's asking fellow -- quote
-- "untouchables" to share their
stories. Read how this is
opening up a new discussion
on discrimination in her home
country on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs from our PBS
colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
later this evening. Here's a
preview:
GWEN IFILL: Remember when Donald
and Ted and Hillary and Bernie
said they weren't going
to attack each other? Well, that
was then. Now the polls are
tight, the voters are deciding,
and the rubber is about to hit
the road. Also tonight, the
Supreme Court tackles
immigration
again, and Iran frees U.S.
hostages, but not without a
cost.
We will cover all of that
tonight on "Washington Week" --
Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thanks, Gwen.
Tomorrow's edition of "PBS
NewsHour Weekend" looks at two
police departments that are
retraining
officers to be better prepared
for confrontations, including
when to use lethal force.
NARRATOR: This training in full
protective gear is known as a
reality-based scenario.
MAN: Get your hands up.
I want your hands up.
NARRATOR: In Philadelphia, every
officer gets 40 hours of this
reality training to learn
tactics other than lethal force,
even when suspects are armed and
dangerous.
MAN: Is he threatening
anybody right now?
MAN: No.
MAN: Is he killing
anybody right now?
MAN: No.
NARRATOR: Sergeant Kenneth Gill,
a police academy instructor,
says the training is designed
to teach police officer how to
de-escalate emotionally-charged
confrontations.
SGT. KENNETH GILL, Philadelphia
Police Department: Slow down the
momentum. Don't just always
just rush into something. You
want to be able to look at your
surroundings. What else can
I do except for jump in?
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's
tomorrow night, on "PBS NewsHour
Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday, when we will have a
wrap-up of the weekend's
political highlights from the
campaign trail, one week ahead
of Iowa's vote.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.